# CS-465-Portfolio

# Compare and contrast the types of frontend development you used in your full stack project, including Express, HTML, JavaScript, and the single-page application (SPA).
For the frontend of the client side portion, the full stack project utilized a combination of Express, HTML, and Javascript to perform various functions. Express and JavaScript were used to create the model, view, and controller modules for the web application that would handle incoming and outgoing requests made in the browser by the user. Then a static HTML page would be retrieved or a handlebars template depending on the type of request being made to the server. The overall result is that the combination of Express, JavaScript, and HTML were utilized in tandem to fulfill browser requests to the server, and outputting the correct information to the client at the frontend. With the SPA, Angular was used in place of Express, HTML, and JavaScript to create a functional user interface for the admin functions of the web application. The major difference between the SPA and the client frontend being that an SPA loads everything to a single-page instead of requiring multiple pages or templates. And that since the SPA relied on Angular, the structure of the project consists of components and services to achieve functionality instead of models, views, and controllers.

# Why did the backend use a NoSQL MongoDB database?
A NoSQL MongoDB database was used for the backend of the web application mainly because it is scalable and can be queried easily. This enables the web application to be able to handle incoming requests from a browser quickly and with accuracy so that the client frontend is responsive. MongoDB also works well with JSON formatted documents, which are compatible with frontend applications.

# How is JSON different from Javascript and how does JSON tie together the frontend and backend development pieces?
JSON is derived from JavaScript as the acronym means "JavaScript Object Notation". But even if it derives from it, JSON is not limited to just the JavaScript language. JSON is really a data formatting specification. The common formats are key/value pairs or ordered lists. JavaScript on the other hand is as mentioned a programming language that can utilize JSON to define objects made with the language. Therefore, using JSON with an API designed with JavaScript language ties the frontend with the backend of the web application. As the frontend API can be used by the client to make requests to the server through JSON to receive the correct data for display.

# Provide instances in the full stack process when you refactored code to improve functionality and efficiencies, and name the benefits that come from reusable user interface (UI) components.
While following the full stack guide, the static HTML pages used intially were eventually refactored to become templates with the usage of handlebars. The usage of a template over a static page then allows the web application to reuse the structure of a webpage while changing its contents dynamically. This allows the web application to become more efficient since it cuts down on redundant code to create the same UI elements for each individual webpage, as would be if static pages were used. Consistent UI elements also generally lead to better user experiences due thanks to consistency in appearance between webpages. As well as improved ease of use with interactable elements maintaining their positioning. 

# Methods for request and retrieval necessitate various types of API testing of endpoints, in addition to the difficulties of testing with added layers of security. Explain your understanding of methods, endpoints, and security in a full stack application.
Based on the work completed for the software design documentation, the HTTP methods are the types of requests or interactions that can be made by the client to the server. These include POST, GET, PUT, and DELETE methods, which were used in testing the functions of the SPA for adding, editing, and deleting trip data. The API endpoints themeselves are how the client can perform various methods of interaction by communicating with the server. An example would be the action of logging into the application, which requires the POST HTTP method to send authenticated credentials to the server for verification. This action would be completed within the API's login page at the corresponding login URL. To ensure security of the full stack application, authentication was achieved with a JWT (JSON Web Token) that would give access to the API's endpoints to trusted users.

# How has this course helped you in reaching your professional goals? What skills have you learned, developed, or mastered in this course to help you become a more marketable candidate in your career field?
This course will help me in the future to reach professional goals as a showcase of my capabilites as a programmer. Thanks to this project, I have gotten a lot of experience working with different software to create a full stack application. This means that I have grown my skillset to combine both the efforts required to develop the front and backend experiences with an application. Beforehand, I had really only worked on one end or the other throughout the various courses I have taken. Now I some material to show potential employers that I am capable of creating complete applications with functional UI, database integration, and secure practices for future career opportunities. As for the skills I have learned, I got to experience how different software development and database tools can be combined within a full stack application. Specifically, the MEAN stack was used throughout the development of this project. I had worked previously with MongoDB in another course and was familiar with how it operated. But this was the first time I used Express, Angular, and Node.js. And while using them, I learned about developing the frontend client with Express and its MVC (Model-View-Controller) framework. Using Angular taught me how to develop SPAs by adding different components and services. And writing code with Node.js helped me understand how to engage with the server side through JavaScript.
